---
layout: post
title: "My first course in analysis"
date: 2021-12-14
categories: mathematics
usemathjax: true
---

$$\newcommand{\diff}[2]{\frac{d #1}{d #2}}
\newcommand{\pard}[2]{\frac{\partial #1}{\partial #2}}
\newcommand{\exist}{\exists\thinspace}
\newcommand{\all}{\forall\thinspace}
\newcommand{\actson}{\curvearrowright}
\newcommand{\degrees}{^{\circ}}
\newcommand{\sumcyc}{\sum_{\textrm{cyc}}}
\newcommand{\sumsym}{\sum_{\textrm{sym}}}
\newcommand{\jacobi}[2]{\left( \frac{#1}{#2} \right)}
\newcommand{\into}{\hookrightarrow}
\newcommand{\proj}{\twoheadrightarrow}
\newcommand{\eps}{\varepsilon}
\newcommand{\ol}{\overline}
\newcommand{\ul}{\underline}
\newcommand{\wt}{\widetilde}
\newcommand{\wh}{\widehat}
\newcommand{\cbrt}[1]{\sqrt[3]{#1}}
\renewcommand{\bar}[1]{\overline{#1}}
\renewcommand{\vec}[1]{\overrightarrow{#1}}
\newcommand{\given}{\Longleftarrow}
\renewcommand{\iff}{\Longleftrightarrow}
\renewcommand{\implies}{\Longrightarrow}
\DeclareMathOperator{\End}{End}
\DeclareMathOperator{\Aut}{Aut}
\DeclareMathOperator{\ad}{ad}
\DeclareMathOperator{\im}{im}
\DeclareMathOperator{\Ker}{Ker}
\DeclareMathOperator{\coker}{coker}
\DeclareMathOperator{\Coker}{Coker}
\DeclareMathOperator{\tr}{tr}
\DeclareMathOperator{\Tr}{Tr}
\DeclareMathOperator{\rk}{rk}
\DeclareMathOperator{\Spec}{Spec}
\renewcommand{\AA}{\mathbb{A}}
\newcommand{\CC}{\mathbb{C}}
\newcommand{\CP}{\mathbb{CP}}
\newcommand{\DD}{\mathbb{D}}
\newcommand{\EE}{\mathbb{E}}
\newcommand{\FF}{\mathbb{F}}
\newcommand{\HH}{\mathbb{H}}
\newcommand{\ii}{\mathbb{i}}
\newcommand{\II}{\mathbb{I}}
\newcommand{\KK}{\mathbb{K}}
\newcommand{\NN}{\mathbb{N}}
\newcommand{\OO}{\mathbb{O}}
\newcommand{\PP}{\mathbb{P}}
\newcommand{\QQ}{\mathbb{Q}}
\newcommand{\RR}{\mathbb{R}}
\newcommand{\RP}{\mathbb{RP}}
\newcommand{\XX}{\mathbb{X}}
\newcommand{\ZZ}{\mathbb{Z}}
\newcommand{\mbb}[1]{\mathbb{#1}}
\newcommand{\id}{\mathrm{id}}
\newcommand{\diam}{\mathrm{diam}}
\newcommand{\lcm}{\mathrm{lcm}}
\newcommand{\ord}{\mathrm{ord}}
\newcommand{\Pow}{\mathrm{Pow}}
\newcommand{\sgn}{\mathrm{sgn}}
\newcommand{\Hom}{\mathrm{Hom}}
\newcommand{\Iso}{\mathrm{Iso}}
\newcommand{\Mat}{\mathrm{Mat}}
\newcommand{\Reg}{\mathrm{Reg}}
\newcommand{\Rad}{\mathrm{Rad}}
\newcommand{\Ext}{\mathrm{Ext}}
\newcommand{\Tor}{\mathrm{Tor}}
\newcommand{\Mor}{\mathrm{Mor}}
\newcommand{\rad}{\mathrm{rad}}
\renewcommand{\Im}{\mathrm{Im}}
\newcommand{\Ann}{\mathrm{Ann}}
\newcommand{\mrm}[1]{\mathrm{#1}}
\newcommand{\Grp}{\mathsf{Grp}}
\newcommand{\AbGrp}{\mathsf{AbGrp}}
\newcommand{\Vect}{\mathsf{Vect}}
\newcommand{\Mod}{\mathsf{Mod}}
\newcommand{\Set}{\mathsf{Set}}
\newcommand{\Ch}{\mathsf{Ch}}
\newcommand{\cat}[1]{\mathsf{#1}}
\newcommand{\SA}{\mathscr{A}}
\newcommand{\SB}{\mathscr{B}}
\newcommand{\SC}{\mathscr{C}}
\newcommand{\SD}{\mathscr{D}}
\newcommand{\SF}{\mathscr{F}}
\newcommand{\SG}{\mathscr{G}}
\newcommand{\scr}[1]{\mathscr{#1}}
\newcommand{\frk}[1]{\mathfrak{#1}}
\newcommand{\abs}[1]{\left\vert #1 \right\vert}
\newcommand{\pr}[1]{\left( #1 \right)}
\newcommand{\floor}[1]{\left\lfloor #1 \right\rfloor}
\newcommand{\ceil}[1]{\left\lceil #1 \right\rceil}
\newcommand{\norm}[1]{\| #1 \|}$$


This fall (2021) I took Princeton University's MAT 216, or Multivariable Analysis and Linear Algebra I. This was the first time I ever took an actual undergraduate-level math course. Our lecturer [Alan Chang](https://sites.google.com/view/alanchang) was extremely nice and very good at explaining things, which has the downside of making everything seem effortless and easy until it's you who actually does the work.

The purpose of this post is to review interesting content I learned from that course. I wrote this mainly as a memory-refresher for myself; despite that, the reader would hopefully still find this post useful in life-threatening circumstances.

In this post, $$\subset$$ means "is a (*not necessarily proper*) subset of".


## Baire Category Theorem

This theorem has always been really scary for me, because the word "category" reminds me of my constant terror when learning category theory. This theorem has absolutely nothing to do with that monster. Recall that a topological space $$S$$ is *locally compact* if for any point $$a\in S$$, there exists a compact set $$K\subset S$$ such that $$a$$ lies in the interior of $$K$$. Also, a *pseudometric space* is just a metric space where you allow the distance of two distinct points to be zero. 

We say a topological space is *Baire* if for each countable collection of dense open sets $$\{E_1, E_2, E_3,\dots \}$$, their intersection $$\bigcap_n E_n$$ is dense. The Baire Category Theorem (BCT) is often stated in two parts:

**Theorem (Baire Category Theorem).** Any locally compact Hausdorff space is Baire. Any complete pseudometric space is Baire.

*Proof.* We prove the first sentence. First, recall a lemma about locally compact Hausdorff (LCH) spaces:

> Lemma: If $$S$$ is LCH, then for any point $$a\in S$$ and any open neighborhood $$U$$ of $$a$$, there exists an open $$V$$ such that $$a\in V \subset \overline{V} \subset U$$ and $$\overline{V}$$ is compact.

To prove this lemma, first take a compact set $$K$$ containing $$a$$ in its interior. Then $$\operatorname{int}(K) \cap U$$ is an open set containing $$a$$. The boundary of that set is closed, and is disjoint from the closed set $$\{a\}$$; because $$S$$ is Hausdorff, there must exist disjoint open sets $$X,W$$ respectively containing $$\{a\}$$ and $$\partial(\operatorname{int}(K) \cap U)$$. We let $$V = X\cap \operatorname{int}(K) \cap U$$, then $$\overline{V}$$ lies inside $$U\cap \operatorname{int}(K)$$. Since $$\overline{V}$$ a closed subset of a compact set, it is compact as well. This proves the lemma.

Back to the theorem, take any open set $$U$$ inside a LCH space $$S$$, as well as a countable set of dense open sets $$E_1,E_2,E_3,\dots$$. The goal is to show that $$U\cap (\bigcap_n E_n)$$ is nonempty. Take $$a_1\in (U\cap E_1)$$, and according to the above lemma, take an open neighborhood $$U_1\subset \overline{U_1} \subset (U\cap E_1)$$, such that $$\overline{U_1}$$ is compact. We now essentially repeat this procedure with $$U_1$$: take $$a_2\in (U_1\cap E_2)$$, and take an open neighborhood $$U_2\subset \overline{U_2} \subset (U_1\cap E_2)$$, such that $$\overline{U_2}$$ is compact. 

We repeat this with $$U_2,U_3,\dots$$ (formally, we would use induction to find $$U_n$$). Now observe that $$\bar{U_1}\supset \bar{U_2}\supset \bar{U_3}\dots$$ form a descending chain of compact sets, so by Cantor's intersection theorem $$\bigcap_n \bar{U_n}$$ is nonempty. Say $$a$$ lies in this set. Then since $$\bar{U_n}\subset (U\cap E_n)$$, $$a$$ belongs to all of $$E_n$$ and $$U$$. This completes the proof.

For complete pseudometric spaces, one would replace $$U_n$$ with open balls of radii converging to 0, and replace Cantor's intersection theorem with an application of completeness. The reader should verify the details; for example, one should see that $$\bar{U_n}$$ should correspond to closed balls instead of the closure of open balls, and that the two are not the same.

We should now explain how this theorem has anything to do with categories (with the word's colloquial, muggle-friendly meaning). For a space $$S$$ and a subset $$E\subset S$$, $$E$$ is called *nowhere dense* if $$\operatorname{int}(\bar{E}) = \varnothing$$; equivalently, $$S\backslash\bar{E}$$ is a dense open set (exercise).

For a Hausdorff space $$S$$ and a subset $$E\subset S$$, $$E$$ is of the *first (resp. second) category* if it is (resp. isn't) the union of countably many nowhere dense subsets. Then it is an easy corollary of BCT that a LCH space (e.g. $$\RR$$) is always a set of the second category (in itself). As an easy corollary of that, $$\QQ$$ is not the intersection of countably many open sets of $$\RR$$.

We mention one striking application of BCT. It answers the following question: if a smooth function $$f: (0,1)\to \RR$$ satisfies that for any $$x\in (0,1)$$, there exists $$n$$ such that $$f^{(n)}(x) = 0$$, must $$f$$ be a polynomial? The reader should pause and think for a moment before looking at the solution below.

*Solution to the problem:* Suppose $$f$$ is not a polynomial. Consider the union of all open intervals $$(a,b) \subset (0,1)$$ such that $$f\vert_{(a,b)}$$ is a polynomial. Let $$X$$ be the complement of this set. Then $$X$$ is a nonempty perfect set (in $$(0,1)$$). Let $$S_n = \{x \in (0,1) \mid f^{(n)}(x) = 0\}$$, then each $$S_n$$ is closed, and the sets $$X\cap S_1, X\cap S_2, \dots$$ cover $$X$$. Because $$X$$ is LCH, we conclude one of $$X\cap S_n$$ is not nowhere dense, i.e. $$\bar{X\cap S_n} = X\cap S_n$$ contains $$X\cap (r,s)$$ for some open interval $$(r,s)$$. Since every point in $$X$$ is a limit point of $$X$$, we conclude $$f^m(x) = 0$$ for all $$x\in X\cap (r,s)$$ and $$m\ge n$$. On the other hand, consider any maximal interval in $$(R\backslash X)\cap (r,s)$$, and $$f^n(x)$$ must be zero on that interval as well. We conclude that $$f^n$$ is zero on $$(r,s)$$, so it is a polynomial on $$(r,s)$$. This contradicts the fact thst $$(r,s)\not\subset (R\backslash X)$$.


## Arzelà-Ascoli

The Arzelà-Ascoli Theorem characterizes compact sets of continuous fucntions. Recall that a family $$\mathcal{F}$$ of functions between metric spaces $$(S,\rho_S)\to (T,\rho_T)$$ is called *uniformly equicontinuous* if for any $$\eps>0$$ there exists $$\delta>0$$ such that $$\rho_S(x,y) < \delta$$ implies $$\rho_T(f(x),f(y)) < \eps$$ for any $$x,y\in S$$ and any $$f\in \mathcal{F}$$.

**Theorem (Arzelà-Ascoli).** Let $$\{f_n\}$$ be an infinite sequence of continuous functions between compact metric spaces $$S,T$$. If the set $$\{f_n\}$$ is uniformly equicontinuous, then $$\{f_n\}$$ has a subsequence that converges uniformly. 

Conversely, any uniformly convergent sequence of functions is uniformly equicontinuous; this is easier and is left as an evercise to the reader. Anyways, to show Arzelà-Ascoli, we first pick a countable dense subset of $$S$$. To do this, fix a natural number $$n$$, and consider the open balls of radius $$1/n$$ around each point $$a\in S$$. Compactness reduces this to finitely many neighborhoods covering $$S$$, and suppose these neighborhoods were centered at points in a finite set $$A_n$$. Then taking the union of $$A_n$$ across all $$n$$, the resulting set is countable and dense. 

Now, suppose this countable dense set consists of points $$a_1,a_2,\dots$$. The sequence $$f_n(a_1)$$ must have a convergent subsequence (by compactness of $$T$$); call the functions in the subsequence $$f^1_1, f^1_2, f^1_3,\dots$$ (those are indices, not powers). The sequence $$f^1_1(a_2), f^1_2(a_2),\dots$$ again must have a convergent subsequence, and we call those functions $$f^2_1, f^2_2, f^2_3,\dots$$. So $$\{f^2_n\}$$ is a subsequence of $$\{f^1_n\}$$, which is a subsequence of $$\{f_n\}$$.

This process can be continued indefinitely, but it seems we can never reach a subsequence that converges at all the points $$a_1,a_2,\dots$$; after all, there are countably many. But now we can use a magic trick: take the diagonal elements $$g_n = f^n_n$$. Then for any fixed $$k$$, the sequence $$\{g_n(a_k)\}$$ converges.

Finally, we show that the sequence $$\{g_n\}$$ is uniformly convergent on all of $$S$$. It suffices to show they are uniformly Cauchy (if you are not sure why this is true, prove it!). Pick any $$\eps$$. By uniform equicontinuity, there exists $$\delta$$ such that for any $$g_m$$ and any $$a,b\in S$$, $$\rho_S(a,b) < \delta$$ implies $$\rho_T(g_m(a), g_m(b)) < \eps/3$$. Consider the open balls centered at each $$a_k$$ with radius $$\delta$$. These cover $$S$$, and we may reduce it to a finite subcover over a finite set of $$a_k$$'s ($$k\in K$$). Because $$\{g_n(a_k)\}$$ is Cauchy for each of these $$k$$'s, we can take $$\delta$$ small enough to ensure $$\rho_T(g_m(x_k), g_n(x_k))$$ for $$m,n \ge N_k$$. So we can use the estimate

$$\rho_T(g_m(x), g_n(x)) \le \rho_T(g_m(x), g_m(x_k)) + \rho_T(g_m(x_k), g_n(x_k)) + \rho_T(g_n(x_k), g_n(x)),$$

and each of the terms on the right is less than $$\eps/3$$ for $$m,n \ge \max_{k\in K} N_k$$. This concludes the proof.

Notice that the space of continuous functions between metric spaces is also a metric space under, for example, the $$L^{\infty}$$-norm; then Arzelà-Ascoli essentially says that a subset $$\mathcal{F}$$ of that function space is compact provided that it is equicontinuous. (For functions to thing like $$\RR$$ which is not compact, you also need a uniform boundedness contition to ensure the compactness of $$\mathcal{F}$$.)


## Fundamental Theorem of Algebra

This is a low-tech proof for the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra. Suppose $$P(z)$$ is a complex polynomial with degree $$n>0$$ and no roots, i.e. $$\vert P(z)\vert >0$$ for all $$z\in\CC$$. For $$\vert z\vert $$ sufficiently large (say $$\vert z\vert \ge R$$ for some large real $$R$$), we always have $$\vert P(z)\vert  > \vert P(0)\vert $$, which means that the minimum of $$\vert P(z)\vert $$ on the disk $$\vert z\vert \le R$$ occurs at $$z_0$$ in the interior of the disk. Write

$$P(z) = \sum_{m=0}^n b_m(z-z_0)^m$$

and let $$b_k(z-z_0)^k$$ be the smallest nonzero term (apart from $$b_0 = P(z_0) \neq 0$$). Then for $$z$$ sufficiently close to $$z_0$$,

$$\vert P(z)\vert  \le \vert b_0 + b_k(z-z_0)^k\vert  + M\vert z-z_0\vert ^{k+1}$$

for a fixed constant $$M$$. In particular, we take $$z-z_0 = t\zeta$$ where $$t$$ is a small real number and $$\zeta^k = -b_0/b_k$$. Then we conclude that

$$\vert P(z_0 + t\zeta)\vert  \le \vert b_0\vert (1-t^k) + M\vert \zeta\vert ^{k+1}t^{k+1} = \vert b_0\vert  - \vert b_0\vert t^k(1 - M\vert \zeta\vert ^{k+1}t/\vert b_0\vert )$$.

This is smaller than $$\vert P(z_0)\vert $$ when $$t$$ is sufficiently small, which is a contradiction.




## Stone-Weierstrass Theorem

This is an exciting one since it's so unexpected. Consider 
